As an employee, it's important to be aware of the policies and procedures in your workplace. Understanding the policies and procedures that impact you can have a positive impact on your working life. It lets you know what is expected of you and what rights you have. Here are 10 real examples of workplace policies and procedures:
1. Code of conduct
A code of conduct is a common policy found in most businesses. It is a set of rules that companies expect employees to follow. The rules establish the expected behavioural standards for all employees.
A code of conduct policy may cover the following:
attendance and absence
employee behaviour
company values
break and mealtime policies
confidentiality
use of company property
use of social media
plagiarism
travel policies
conflicts of interest
client interaction
dress code
reporting misconduct.
Related: 8 Code of Conduct Examples: A Workplace Guide
2. Recruitment policy
A workplace recruitment policy outlines how the company hires new people. It sets out the hiring process and aims to promote consistency in the recruitment process.
It's an important document for employees to access and may cover the following things:
internal and external hiring preferences
equal opportunity and anti-discrimination
job description and advertisement templates
selection process and timeframe
how to review resumes and cover letters
the expected amount of short-listed applicants
how to check references
how to select a suitable candidate and offer the job.
Related: Recruitment Process Steps: What Is Involved?
3. Internet and email policy
This policy outlines how companies expect employees to use their email accounts and the internet. It helps to save time and promote efficiency. It also sets up procedures to minimise risk, which is especially important for secure networks.
An internet and email policy may cover the following things:
internet access rules
appropriate online usage
controls on misuse of the internet
restrictions on web browsing
a security protocol for online data
download rules
social networking rules
work email usage rules
how to frame emails to colleagues
work email usage at home or outside the office.
4. Mobile phone policy
A mobile phone policy covers the rules of mobile phone usage in the workplace. It may cover personal mobile phone usage as well as work mobile phones. This policy in the workplace will provide employees with a comprehensive set of rules about when and how they are allowed to use their mobile phones. This sort of policy is set up to promote productivity and reduce distractions.
It may cover the following:
when you can use your personal mobile phone
where you can keep your personal mobile phone during office hours
rules surrounding personal phone calls
how to use your work mobile phone
what is and isn't acceptable use for your work mobile phone.
Related: What Is a Remuneration Package? (And How to Negotiate One)
5. Smoking policy
A smoking policy covers a workplace's rules regarding smoking and tobacco use. Many companies do not allow smoking on their premises. It's important for employees to know where and when they can smoke, if applicable.
A smoking policy may cover the following:
whether smoking is allowed
designated smoking areas
smoking breaks
smoking off-site.
6. Drug and alcohol policy
This type of policy covers a company's rules regarding drug and alcohol use. It may mention procedures for dealing with rule-breaking. It may also mention the procedure for dealing drug testing.
A drug and alcohol policy is usually a strict list of rules that may cover the following:
a company's tolerance to drug and alcohol use
drug testing rules
alcohol use rules (i.e., Friday drinks)
procedure for dealing with intoxicated individuals.
7. Health and safety policy
This type of policy covers a company's obligations under work health and safety laws. It is an important policy because it establishes how employees are protected.
Such a policy may cover the following:
risk assessment
employee safety training
first aid information
equipment maintenance
safe handling of materials and substances
supervision rules
delegation of authority
accident training
physical and mental health information
monitoring hazards
emergency procedures.
Related: 6 Careers in Policy (With Skills and Tips for Policy Work)
8. Anti-discrimination and harassment policy
An anti-discrimination and harassment policy is important to promote a healthy and positive workplace for all employees. One of the key things to include in this policy is education. Education is one of the best ways to prevent discrimination and harassment.
This type of policy may cover the following:
procedure for employee complaints
education and training for employees
provide a clear definition of discrimination and harassment
guidelines for dealing with discrimination and harassment
how management expects to respond to complaints
confidentiality information.
Related: 5 Steps to Become a Better Ally at Work
9. Grievance handling policy
A grievance-handling policy is particularly important for employees. A grievance is a formal complaint made by an employee towards an employer. This policy can outline your rights as an employee and how the company expects to respond to your grievance.
The policy can cover the following:
procedure for submitting a formal grievance
company policy regarding response
procedure for investigating the grievance
time frame
confidentiality
possible outcomes
appeal information.
Related: What is a Grievance Procedure: Your Guide
10. Discipline and termination policy
A discipline and termination policy establishes how a company may handle employees who don't follow its policies. It demonstrates consequences and possible dismissals. This type of policy is important for employees as it lists their rights in terms of discipline and termination.
This policy may cover the following:
procedure for dealing with incidents that go against company policy
how a company responds to rule breaks
your rights to appeal discipline
procedure for an investigation into incidents
reasons for termination
pre-termination procedure
how to tell an employee they have been let go
post-termination procedure.
Related: Understanding Termination Letters (Definition, Tips and Example)
Get your personalised job feed on Indeed
Be the first to see new jobs in your area
Frequently asked questions about policies and procedures in the workplace
Here is a list of the most commonly asked questions surrounding examples of policies and procedures in the workplace:
What are workplace policies?
Workplace policies are sets of rules put in place that cover employee/employer behaviours and attitudes. They are an important factor in a well-run business. Understanding workplace policies is key for employees. It allows a business to run smoothly and gives information about employee rights.
Read more: What Are Company Policies? (And What to Know About Them)
What is a workplace procedure?
A workplace procedure directly relates to workplace policies. A procedure is a list of steps demonstrating how to implement a policy. Policies and procedures are used together to give employees a good understanding of company rules and values.
Related: Tips on Writing a Procedure (With Importance and Steps)
What is an example of a workplace policy?
Workplace policies tend to be long, detailed documents. Here is a shortened and simplified example:
Attendance Policy
Attendance is an essential part of a job function. All Firm Evolution employees are expected to report to work as scheduled and to work effectively throughout their shifts.
Absence
Absence includes time lost from the work schedule due to avoidable or unavoidable circumstances.
Absence procedure
It is your responsibility to notify the company regarding absences. Notification from another employee or family member is not acceptable except under emergency conditions.
Time off should be requested in advance in written format. Your supervisor should be notified by email or phone in the case of unexpected time off due to illness or emergency.
Leaving work early due to illness or personal reasons should be approved by your manager or HR representative.
Continued absence
If your absence continues beyond one day you should continue to notify your managing team for each day you are away.
Acceptable reasons
The following are acceptable reasons to request absence:
unforeseen personal or family illness or injury
jury duty
bereavement
leave protected under an applicable law
other reasons that would require you to miss a part or full day's work without advanced notice.
Documentation
Documentation, such as a doctor's note, may be required as part of your absence.
Consequences
Failure to comply with proper attendance policy procedure may result in disciplinary action including and up to termination of employment. Absence of three days or longer with no reason or notification may be considered a voluntary resignation.